[Music]
alright let me start with a confession
I'm a scaredy cat yep whenever I travel
by water I tend to imagine various
catastrophic scenarios until I get so
edgy that my neighbors begin to worry
about me now on the other hand I
realized that the eyes of being trapped
on a sinking ship nowadays are quite
loved and there are things you can do to
survive if the near-impossible does
happen so let's say you're setting off
on a long-awaited cruise here on cloud 9
and nothing could be further from your
mind than paying attention to the safety
precautions but however willing you may
be to waste precious vacation time on
listening to safety instructions you
should remember that chances are it
could save your life
sy is crucial to take part in the
first-day safety drill during this drill
you need to check if your personal
flotation device is in your cabin if not
immediately inform the crew if a tragedy
strikes is absence may cost you your
life on top of that try to remember
where the lifeboat closest to your cabin
is and figure out how to get there if
it's dark or the weather is storming
also read the instructions for how to
put on and use your floatation device in
short get as much information on how to
save your life in case of an emergency
as possible imagine that your journey is
pleasant and uneventful until one day
BAM something goes terribly wrong and
your ships start sinking Oh No hopefully
it'll never happen to you but just in
case it's vitally important to know how
to react first you'll hear the
evacuation signal this is the captain
sorry to interrupt you I just wanted to
let you know the ship is sinking and
you're all on your own
bye no that's not it it's actually seven
short honks in a long one after that
listen attentively the captain or
another crew member in charge and
explain what's happening through the
intercom so now you're sure that the
unthinkable is happening and the ship
you're on is going underwater
try to stay call you have no time for
panic if you're in your cabin
immediately put on your floatation
device and take anything else that may
help you later
however if you realize you're running
out of time just leave all your
possessions where they are and hurry to
save your life
it's all about priorities you know but
if you still have some time to prepare
put on all the waterproof clothing you
might have be it gloves a jacket or
something to protect your head the next
step which might become a life-altering
one is to get to safety and to do that
you need to follow the ship's directions
to a tee no we're not playing golf here
you can tee off some other time these
crewmembers really know the ship and are
specially trained in rescue procedures
that's why you should only act on your
own if there's no one in charge of the
evacuation if you don't know the
language everyone around is shouting in
remember two critical things get up and
on while doing it you might see people
rushing towards the lower levels of the
ship or even its center don't be
surprised
that's how panic works regrettably
studies claim that only 35% of people
managed to stay calm in a critical
situation if you're one of those lucky
ones help other passengers to get their
bearings otherwise their actions may
slow down the evacuation process
what's more panicking people tend to
forget themselves shoving one another
and causing additional injuries that
could be avoided and putting you in even
more danger by the way while panicking
some people may simply freeze with fear
if you see a person standing still in
the middle of the turmoil yell at them
it's an effective way to bring them back
to reality after that concentrate on
your top priority tasks which is to get
to a lifeboat as quickly as possible
remember that the ship may start to tilt
to one side making this task more
difficult try to stay upright by
grabbing pipes handrails furniture and
other stuff and never ever use the
elevator after all bell
last place you want to be on a sinking
ship is stuck in an elevator right and
if you're still on the lower decks when
the water is coming in and the ship is
listing which means leaning watch out
for massive floating objects and things
that may be falling around you they
could knock you unconscious and when you
recover it could be too late to escape
as soon as you get to the deck
immediately rush for a lifeboat if you
can't figure out where the nearest
lifeboat is search for crew members who
are helping passengers evacuate the crew
isn't supposed to leave the ship until
they help all the passengers get to
safety
do not stay on the deck with the crew
helping them they'll do their job and
you must do yours which is saving your
life and the lives of your loved ones
but eventually when you've reached the
lifeboat and are about to climb inside
it's crucial that you do it without
getting wet as soon as your clothes soak
up water the risks of hypothermia and
cold shock become much higher that's why
you need to follow the crews
instructions they'll show you where it's
best to enter the boat but let's say you
look around and see no available
lifeboats whatsoever and start to panic
what then in that case try to find some
flotation device like a life preserver
ring and throw it into the water
unfortunately it won't save you if you
must spend a long time in the really
cold sea but on the other hand it may
help you stay afloat until rescuers
arrive if there's no time left and you
realize you'll have to jump off the ship
always check where you'll land first
otherwise you may be hit by some
wreckage a boat or other people and end
up underwater try to jump as close to a
rescue boat as possible swim toward it
and attract attention by waving your
arms and shouting when inside make
yourself calm down and wait patiently
for the rescue meanwhile huddle together
with other survivors to stay warm and
treat any injuries you have
if you haven't managed to reach a
lifeboat or a life raft get yourself
ready for even more hardship usually the
water is cold and the sea is rough which
decreases your chances to survive the
cold shock may pull you underwater even
faster than hypothermia sets in that's
why it's vitally important to collect
yourself concentrate on survival and
distract yourself from terrifying
thoughts by counting remembering poems
or thinking of your loved ones remember
that in good weather you can also suffer
from dehydration sunburn and heatstroke
so if you have some water supply use it
carefully and cover yourself as well as
you can you may ask do I really need to
know this after all the times of the
Titanic are long gone right not really
ships are still sinking nowadays due to
weather conditions human error and many
other factors besides better safe than
sorry you know that's why before going
on a voyage or just taking a short ferry
trip you should understand how ships
sail and even more importantly why they
sink then you'll be able to figure out
what's happening with your ship and find
the fastest way to save your life
surprisingly every ship sinks in a
different way depending on its center of
gravity and size the shape of its hull
and of course the cause of the accident
it was a bit unsettling to learn that
it's natural for most big ships to let
water in through their bottom part
admittedly such ships also have large
pumps that remove this water once it's
level is too high but it doesn't always
work
uh-oh it already sounds scary enough
that drive me away from water travel
whatsoever but wait that's not all a big
ship can't sink after colliding with
another ship or just a massive object
such as an iceberg hmm
sound familiar or as it happened with a
Greek cruise liner MTS Oceanos in 1991 a
rupture in its shell can lead to water
coming inside through sinks showers and
toilets
in this case the pumps can't deal with
all that water and the ship sinks as for
smaller boats the story is very
different since they're made of buoyant
materials as much as possible their
reasons for sinking are usually broken
or incorrect closed doors
absent drain plugs or any other openings
through which water can get inside
that's what happened with the car ferry
Estonia in 1994 shortly after the water
got inside the ship through a broken
door the constant rocking which you
usually feel when the ship is in the
open ocean stop and it was a bad omen
the thing is that a ferry that doesn't
rock can't stabilize itself and indeed
the Estonia lost its center of gravity
began to list and sank in a matter of
minutes so although it sounds like a
terrifying situation at least now you
have the best plan possible for getting
out alive and don't be too afraid to
cast out to sea the chances that your
ship will sink are still extremely low
well I feel better now do you have any
other recommendations on how to escape
from a sinking ship let me know down in
the comments if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share it with a friend
but hey don't abandon ship just yet we
have over 2,000 cool videos for you to
check out yes we do all you have to do
is pick the left or right video click on
it and enjoy stay on the bright side of
life
[Music]